[SOURCE_ID: SC-DK-BASU-GUIDELINES]
[TITLE: Supreme Court of India Landmark Judgment: D.K. Basu v. State of West Bengal (1997) 1 SCC 416]
[AUTHORITY: Supreme Court of India]
[URL: https://indiankanoon.org/doc/501198/]

CONTEXT AND IMPORTANCE:
In D.K. Basu v. State of West Bengal (AIR 1997 SC 610), the Supreme Court of India laid down mandatory requirements and preventive measures to be followed in all cases of arrest or detention till legal provisions are made in that behalf. Failure to comply makes the concerned official liable for departmental action and contempt of court.

KEY MANDATORY GUIDELINES ISSUED BY THE SUPREME COURT:
1. Identification: The police personnel carrying out the arrest and handling the interrogation of the arrestee shall bear accurate, visible and clear identification and name tags with their designations. All particulars must be recorded in a register.
2. Arrest Memo: The police officer carrying out the arrest shall prepare a memo of arrest at the time of the arrest, attested by at least one witness (a family member or respectable person of the locality), countersigned by the arrestee, with exact time and date of arrest.
3. Intimation to Family / Friend: A person who has been arrested or detained has the right to have one friend or relative or other person known to him or having interest in his welfare informed, as soon as practicable, of his arrest and place of detention (within 8 to 12 hours if relative lives outside).
4. Right to know about intimation: The police must make the arrestee aware of this right to have someone informed as soon as he is put under arrest or is detained.
5. Entry in Diary: An entry must be made in the General Diary at the place of detention regarding the arrest, name of the friend/relative informed, and names and particulars of the police officials in whose custody the arrestee is.
6. Right to Medical Examination on Request: The arrestee should, where he so requests, be also examined at the time of his arrest and major and minor injuries, if any present on the arrestee's body, must be recorded in a 'Inspection Memo' signed both by the arrestee and the arresting officer.
7. Routine Medical Examination Every 48 Hours: The arrestee should be subjected to medical examination by a trained doctor every 48 hours during his detention in custody by a doctor from the panel of approved doctors.
8. Copies to Magistrate: Copies of all the documents including the arrest memo referred to above should be sent to the jurisdictional Magistrate for his record.
9. Right to Meet Legal Counsel: The arrestee may be permitted to meet his lawyer during interrogation, though not throughout the interrogation.
10. Police Control Room: A police control room should be provided at all district and State headquarters, where information regarding the arrest and place of custody shall be communicated by the officer causing the arrest within 12 hours of effecting the arrest, and displayed on a conspicuous notice board.
